This is Allison Seal, and I'm in Terry Anderson's
History Class 374. I'm interviewing today Mr.
Plez Turner, who holds City Council Place 2 on the
Bryan City Council.
How long have you lived in Bryan? Since 1945. Where
did you live before coming to Bryan? Well, I lived
in Bradscott out in the rural area. Under what
conditions did you leave? Well, I left and went
into the service. And what service? Army. Army.
Did you go to World War II and fought? Yes. Okay.
When were you elected to the city council? April 7,
1976. Okay.
When was your first vote in a public election?
Well, that man that must have been around. In the
late 40s. In the late 40s? Okay. How old were you? In
my early, in my mid-20s. Where did you vote? In
Bryant? In Bryant, yes. Okay, what were, under
what conditions were you, was there any kind of
discrimination against you in voting? No, it was
normal conditions. The only thing was you had to
have a poll tax. Uh-huh. Okay, uh, In 1964, was
there a freedom summer here, or were blacks always
allowed to vote as long as they paid the poll tax?
Well, they were always allowed to vote as far as I
can remember as long as they paid the poll tax. Did
you go to segregate or desegregate schools?
Segregate schools. What about your children? He
went to segregate school. And your
grandchildren? They went to desegregate
schools. When were the schools desegregated
in
Bryan? That, I don't remember. I don't know
exactly when it was. It's been somewhere around 20
something, 20 years ago I'd say. Okay. Were the
schools equal as in separate but equal before
desegregation? I don't think they were equal.
They were separate and I don't think, I know they
were not equal. Can you describe what you thought
the differences were? Well, the difference that I
had was that the black schools did not have the same
curriculum as the white schools had. Since it was
totaled with the white schools, it was not totaled
with the black schools. Like what? Well, when I was
going, it said just type it, or it was not totaled.
Uh-huh. Sciences were taught with labs? Did they
all have labs? It was a poorly equipped lab. How do
you explain the lack of all due speed in the South to
desegregate the schools after Brown versus
education, which called for desegregation of
separate but equal schools in 1954, but yet
schools in Brown that I remember were not
desegregated until 1970? Well, I think it just
took took a while for it to trickle down. There was a
lot of communities that, I mean, after the Supreme
Court ruled to desegregate them, it took time for
them to put into effect the plans. Then you kept
having court battle after court battle, and
people were waiting. One district was waiting on
the other one to see what this court would rule,
whether this was legal or not. And it just took a
while for it, before it got down. What was the
feeling among the black community of Bryan after
that movement? I would say the feeling was mixed. I
think the majority of the people held the
movement, but some was a little comprehensive
about it, a little worried about what it was going
to be like. Did you feel like that the schools would
in time be desegregated, or did you really not have
much hope that they would be? I felt like they would
eventually be surrogated,
yes. How has the treatment of Blacks and Bryan
changed from the 50s to the 80s, and why do you feel
it's changed? Well, it has been some change. I
guess the main change that I would say would be is
that in the early 50s, everything was surrogate.
You had two water fountains. You had two sets of
restrooms. You had a cafe. You had two kinds, one
for the blacks and one for the whites, you know,
things of that nature. And that has changed, and I
think you're being accepted more now than what you
were.
Which United States president do you think
contributed the most to the civil rights
movement? Well, that's a hard question. I would
have to say Kennedy contributed the most, even
though he didn't live very long. Johnson
contributed equally, I'd say, but I think it was
between those two presidents. One started, the
other one finished it. How would you describe
President Reagan's devotion to the civil rights
on a scale of one to ten? One. And why is that? Well,
every move President Reagan has made is to
go back to discrimination. He has cut out the
affirmative action program practically, and
everything he can do in the legislature would be,
it's contrary to the civil rights movement. What
if any acts of discrimination did you experience?
Oh, wait, you mean what I brought up? Yeah. Well,
like I say, it was that When we were growing up, it
was just two sets of everything. You could not go to
the white schools. You could not go to the, you
know, restaurant. You had to go around to a side
door, a back door. Or if you go to get a drink, why do
they have two fountains? And thanks to that,
nature would discriminate against you. What were
your feelings about the Freedom Rides in 1965 and
the race riots and the bus boycotts? Well, I agreed
with the Freedom Rides. I like the bus boycotts. I
think that they did a lot of good, but for the race
routes, I still don't think they did any good. They
might have helped, but I can't see any. What do you
think brought about the change from in the early
60s, the bus boycotts and the freedom rides, you
know, from a kind of nonviolent protest to then the
black power movement in the late 60s? Well, I would
say Martin Luther King did more for the change than
any one man, a black man. That was what really
brought about the change. But I think the time
had just about caught up with it. See, we were freed
over 100 years ago, but still we're not freed. And
then it just kept chipping away and chipping away
until we finally just got to the point What I was
speaking of is in the early 1960s with Martin
Luther King's nonviolent protest, eventually it
changed to what brought about the race riots and
things where there was black power movements and
it was more a violent protest. Why do you think that
changed? Well, I think that Martin Luther King, he
had enough followers in him. People respect him
enough that when he said nonviolent, they
cooperated with him. Then after he passed along,
there was no one else who had that much respect that
they could say nonviolent and would have the power
to keep it from happening. What happened in Bryan?
Were there any protests or sit-ins or anything
like that? It might have been some very minor
sit-ins, not anything much, though. Some very
minor, yeah, I think it was some minor sit-ins.
Okay. What organizations such as NAACP and SCLC
and SNCC were represented in Bryan? The NAACP, I
think. Did you belong to any of the groups? I
belonged to NAACP. What other black leaders
besides Martin Luther King do you respect?
Well, I respect Roy Wilkins. I think he was great.
And I think Benjamin Hooks is a great black leader.
Jesse Jackson is not a great black leader. What or
to whom do you attribute the success of the
Civil Rights Movement? You mean the person? Or,
yeah.
I would have to attribute it to Amanda the King.
When you were elected to the city council, what was
the voter turnout during the election, and what
percent of white vote and what percent of black
vote did you receive?
Well, let's go back. If we review that first
election, it was a good turnout at first because
there were several of us running, but it was one
black lady, myself, and Hispanic was in the race.
The Hispanic and I got into a runoff, and the 410, I
was re-elected at the end. I don't have the
figures, though. If I'd have known enough
questions, I guess we might have looked it up and
got it, but it was very 19. I don't know. Okay. And
what about the re-elections when you ran a
campaign? Well, I've had one more runoff with a
black lady that was a fairly light turnout. I think
it was about 14% turnout at the end. But usually,
all the races that I've been in, usually it would be
about 20% turnout. When you were on the city
council, did you experience any racism, racial
jokes, etc.?
No. Okay. There have been several terms used to
describe blacks, such as colored in the 20s,
Negroes in the 50s, and blacks in the 60s. Why do you
feel those terms have changed? Just people come
out with a different word that they want to use.
What is your opinion of these terms? Do any of them
offend you?
Twenty-four percent of the soldiers killed in
Vietnam were black, whereas blacks made up only 11
percent of the U.S. society in the 60s. How would
you explain the malaportia? Do you think that the
blacks were drafted over whites? I don't have any
figures on that. I know that a lot of whites were not
drafted. I've read where a lot of them went to
Canada and different places. But then too, during
that time, prosperity was very, it wasn't what it
should have been, I don't think. And a lot of the
blacks volunteered for armed services before
that. And a lot of them was caught in the fuck being
that Vietnam War thing at the time. How do you feel
black person's chances compared to white
person's chances for social mobility are rising
in the social status?
I feel that it's considerably less chance. I think
that if the black is one of the elite, the top
person, then he can rise. But if he's an average,
like the average white, he has a hard time making
the move. What do you attribute that to? Well, it's
still the same thing, that we want to take care of
our own. As long as you have the white person who is
in power who is doing the hiring and the promotion,
well, he's going to take care of his
own first. How would you rate the progress of
blacks in society today in having attained their
civil rights, just starting to almost there or
complete?
I'd say
they're making progress, but it's It's a little
slow, though. I don't say they're almost there. I
guess they're about 25% there. What do you think
would bring about complete change, complete
progress, complete civil rights? Time. Had it not
been for the efforts of Truman, Kennedy, and LBJ in
attaining civil rights legislation and the
Warren Court in upholding the legislation and
setting new precedents for civil rights cases, as
in Brown v. Board of Education, do you feel blacks
today would have the rights they now possess?
Well, I feel that had it not been for them, it would
have been other men, other people that would have
done the same thing. I think the time had just come
and once if they happened to be the ones that was in
office at that time. And I feel that after 100
years, I think it would have made some progress.
OK.
I'm talking to Mr. Turner again on desegregation
in Bryan School District. OK, Mr. Turner, you were
talking about the differences in the
desegregation as far as busing. Could you go on and
tell me? Yes. If you notice that there's only one
grade in the black neighborhood, which is the
sixth grade, the Kemp College School. And when we
look at that, we see that the white student is only
bused out of his neighborhood one year out of the 12
years to come into the minority area. into the
black, predominantly black neighborhood. But
when we reverse that, the black is busted out of his
neighborhood. He's lumping out of the 12 years of
high school. And that's going on right now? Yes,
that's going on right now. And how long, what do you
think will cause a change? Or do you think there
will be a change in that? Well, on the time there
will be a change, the pressure will be put into a
change, I think. Okay, we were also talking about
the schools, the black schools in Bryan compared
to the white schools, and you were telling me about
all the schools that were burnt down. Could you go
through that again and tell me what schools they
were and how often, when they were burnt down? The
first school in Bryan was
Washington College School. It was a historical
mark. I don't
know whether it's still there,
because it was one of the historical schools. And
that school burned down, which, back in the 20s,
the blacks that would graduate, they would have on
their diploma, brown-colored high school, or
something to that effect. Then the next, that
school burned down the next, not very, They had the
junior high school in Brown, which previously was
the high school in Brown before the Kemp was built,
which was near the high school. In fact, that
school was named Kemp High School until the other
high school was built. And R.C. Neal was the
principal there. He taught there for quite a few
years. And after his passing, they named that
school Neal High School and built a new high
school. And they named it Neal Jr. High School and
built a new high school and named it Kemp High
School. And that school also burned down. Within
how many years between the two? I don't think it was
years. I think it was within months. I'm not part of
that, but the record was shown. And then there was a
third high school that burnt? No, just the two high
schools, just the two schools that burnt. And what
were the feelings among the black community as to
how those schools burnt or why they were burnt?
Well, it was a mixed feeling. They felt that it was,
the black community felt that it was some
obstinate in there. arson about white adults or
white children? Well, they didn't, they never did
come up with a specific who it was. It just felt like
it was some arson in there. But I don't think they
thought it was children. They thought it was white
adults. I think we had another school to burn
there, if I'm not mistaken. Did they tear that one
down? If you go back quite a few years ago, on the
side of the cellar. What was the name of that school
there? What was it called? See, the Hispanic had
school, too. They were equally surrogated. And I
think that school burned down, too, if I'm not
mistaken. Do you think the reason why they never
figured out if it was arson or not is because they
didn't really care and they didn't want to point a
finger, since it's whites who would be doing the
investigating, they didn't want to point fingers
at whites? Well, I'd rather not comment on that,
because I really don't know Okay. Yes, that school
did burn down. So it's three schools that burned
down. Because the Hispanic used to go to a school.
In their neighborhood? Yes, it would rather be on
Sandy Center and Luckin Street. Well, a little
place around there was a Hispanic school. Were
they segregated as far as fountains and restrooms
too? I don't remember whether it was or whether it
was not, but I know they were segregated as far as
going to school. Okay. When these schools burnt
down, around what time did that happen? During the
immigration period. Did you ever know of any, did
you ever travel through the South, or did you ever
know of any or hear of any type of restrictions on
blacks in other states? Well, I traveled through
the South,
must have
been in 57 up until Alabama, and it was pretty bad
then for black traveling. You couldn't, you could
not find a hotel hard to see. It must
have been in 64. It was in 64. We went to
Cincinnati. We went to Arkansas. We couldn't find
a decent place to live. Once we spent a night in
Arkansas, we couldn't find a decent motel to live
in. We carried Joe to back to Tuskegee at that time.
We stopped at a cafe to eat and they waved us off.
Yeah, that was in 57. You know, it wasn't a cafe, but
it was something like a drive-in, a hot dog place.
And they just keep going. What other things did you
see? How was the black mood in those towns? Were
they upset or were they just kind of so down? I don't
think they were upset or anything. It was just...
They had to endure it. They knew it until they got a
chance. And when the chance came along, man, you
know, it was improved. But back then, in those
days, there was nothing they could do. If they were
done
with it, they would have been killed. How did Bryan
compare to the other towns? Did Bryan have as much
cruelty toward the blacks, or what do you think?
Not as much as they had that envy of our deep
southern states, such as Mississippi, Alabama,
and those islands. Bryan wasn't as bad? No.
How did the blacks' chances for employment in
Bryan compare to those to a white person? without a
college degree or with a college degree? I say it
was slim because it was, blacks had passed exams
before, but half of them, there was a fellow named
Jim Parker Carroll was a postmaster at that time,
and he hired me, and I was the first black carrier
hired at the Bryant Post Office. The black person
hired at the Bryant Post Office was a custodian, a
janitor. What year was that? That's 1955.
As far as for anyone else, what jobs were available
to a black man in the 50s and 60s? Mostly janitorial
work. If you had an education, teaching was about
the only thing you could get. As far as
salespersons, there was none. They were
nonexistent for us blacks. In the banks back
there, you had nothing but a custodian, a janitor,
an air force, something of that nature. As far as
being a teller or somewhere in the bookkeeping
department, something of that nature.
Like the pine trees lining the winding road I've
got a name, I've got a name
Like the singing bird and the croaking toad I've
got a name, I've got a name And I carry it with me like
my daddy did. But I'm living the dream that
he kept here. Moving me down the highway. Moving me
down the highway. Moving ahead so life won't pass
me by.
Like
a north wind whistling down the sky I've got a song
I've got a song Like a willful will and the baby's
cry I've got a song I've got a song And
I carry it with me and I sing it loud. If it gets me
nowhere, I know they're proud. Moving me down the
highway. Rolling me down the highway. Moving to
hell till I won't pass the fire.
And
I'm gonna go there free Like a fool I am and I'll
always be I've got a dream I've got a dream They can
change their minds but they can't change me I've
got a dream I've got a dream
I know I could share it if you want me to. If you're
going my way, I'll go with you. Bend me down the
highway. Don't let me down the highway. One man
ahead so life won't pass the by. Bend me down the
highway.